[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: There's a
famous poem by Maya Angelou
that goes like this.
"Why does the caged bird sing?"
I would ask why don't we
caged birds sing any longer?
Because we've become
modernized and civilized,
we no longer gather as family
and community and sing.
But what have we lost along
the way as a result of that?
Let's ask Jill Purce,
who is with us today
to speak about the
role of toning, music,
and chanting in our lives.
And first of all, you've
already had a really wonderful
set up by your husband
Rupert Sheldrake, who
credits a lot to you by his way
of experience and understanding
with voice and singing.
And I wanted to start right out
with a wonderful little story
you told on an interview
that I watched with you that
had to do when you
were a little girl,
and you were out on a boat.
And the sea was stormy, or the
lake, or whatever body of water
you were on was stormy.
It's just a beautiful tale.
Would you please
share that with us?
And welcome.
It's wonderful to have you here.
>>JILL PURCE: Thank you.
Thank you.
Well, my father
was very eccentric.
And when I was a
child, he would lead us
on expeditions when everybody
else was going to bed.
And on one occasion, he wanted
to go to this remote island,
and so we set off
very late at night
with nobody in the
boat except my brother,
and my mother and father,
and three old women
standing at the
back of the boat.
And as we set off, a storm came
up, and a really violent storm.
And we all were completely
convinced and terrified that we
were going to drown.
And then, all of a
sudden, these women
started a wailing, crying
chant at the back of the boat.
And with that chant, our
terror turned to ecstasy.
Our fear that we would
drown became a kind
of blissfulness in
the exact moment
that they started chanting.
And then, the wind subsided, the
waves calmed, and we arrived.
And so this in my
experience, this
was my first transmission of
the power of sound as something
which transforms not just our
emotions, but the very elements
themselves.
>>REGINA: You know,
as you're saying that,
what I was going through
my head is that you were
in a state of trauma, in that
momentary kind of frozen state
of trauma when you all
thought you were going to die.
And it's always said that trauma
is the time where the being is
most susceptible and most open
to any kind of suggestion,
like in the world of
hypnotherapy for example.
But that brings the
question of, how
might sound be used when
trauma is occurring in life?
How might it have been
used in the past in tribes,
for example, in
indigenous tribes when
there was a trauma to
the tribe or the family?
>>PURCE: Well sound
has many functions
and it originally sound
was used to maintain life
so people chanted
literally to stay alive
because in traditional
cultures you only stayed alive
if you had a good relationship
with the divine or the God
or that's the great spirit or
whoever you felt was in charge
of our life and destiny.
And so by chanting,
and praising,
praising this great divine
being, you were doing what--
I call these the 3 Ps, so
praising first, and then when
you've praised and thanked,
then petitioning, asking
for help, and then on a
more sophisticated level,
participating. so praising,
petitioning, and participating,
which means
integrating completely
through sound with
a divine being
or with the spiritual
dimension itself.
So sound is used and has always
been used to maintain life
itself.
And then, as we
continued, gradually, we
thought we could
maintain life by seeing
what happened
yesterday, by trying
to predict what would
happen tomorrow,
based on what
happened yesterday.
And in order to do
that, you have to kill,
you have to grind up,
and measure, and then
count in order to
try to establish
if it's going to measure
and count the same tomorrow.
So in traditional cultures,
the world is alive,
and so we have a
living relationship
with that through sound itself.
>>REGINA: And really,
what you were just
saying about becoming concerned
about projecting from the past
into the future,
projecting, and predicting,
and so forth, it takes us
out of the now as well.
And the one thing
about singing is
it's a vibrational
transmission of the now.
And let's talk about--
we have mostly
lost our connection
with the now, which is I
guess why Eckhart Tolle's
book, The Power of Now, was
such a hit is because everybody
forgot how to be here now.
>>PURCE: So that's really
the essence of sound.
I mean, the essence of
sound is that you could only
chant in the present.
You can't chant in the past.
You can't chant in the future.
So as long as you're chanting
in the present, if you,
at the same time, as
chanting the present,
you are listening to yourself
chanting in the present.
Then, you create a
circuit of tension.
So you're chanting
in the present,
and you're listening
to the chant
that you are chanting
at the same time
as you're chanting it.
So you're maintaining yourself
in the present moment,
and that's one of the key
qualities, the gifts of sound,
which is that, unlike
mindfulness, where you're
attending to what's
happening around you,
you're actually doing the thing
that you're being mindful of.
So this circuit of
attention is absolutely key.
And so you are in the present.
So normally, we spend
most of our time
naming that which is other
than us, as separate from us,
so giving names.
So from an early childhood, the
more names we have for things--
we sit on our parents' knee
who points out images and say
cows, sheep, dog.
And then, the more names
we have for things,
the more articulate we
think that we become,
the more separate we become
from that which is not us,
the greater our
language, the better
degrees we get at university,
the better colleges we go to.
But there's more that's
outside of us, which is not us.
There's more definition,
more separation.
The ego is more defined, more
separate, more articulated.
And so there's more to overcome.
So most spiritual
practices involve
using these doors of perception.
So, for example, you know,
using names to go beyond names.
So if I say tree, then going
to the essence of treeness.
So sound allows us to overcome
this state of separation, which
means that we're usually in
a state of regressing what we
forgot to do in the past
and writing what we will,
therefore, have to do
in the future, which
means we are isolated.
We're in a kind of
separated from this time
line, which has no existence
except it's a delusional.
>>REGINA: It's
just a perception.
Right, an illusion.
>>PURCE: And so the
essence of sound
is it allows us to overcome
these regrets of the past,
these dreads of the future,
to be in the present,
continuously in the present,
for as long as we listen
to the sound that we're making.
And so the key is not to forget
to listen or to remember when
we have forgotten,
which is difficult
because we have forgotten.
>>REGINA: Right.
You bring up a few key points
that I'm going to take off on,
riff on a little bit with you.
And one of them
is the notion of--
as you say, people used
to sing to stay alive.
And we think of the
only fuel that we
need to stay alive is
things like food, water,
and supplements.
Some people would say
wine and other things,
but the point is we think
that's what keeps us alive
when we have forgotten that
everything is frequency based.
And those things are
maybe the densest
of all frequencies we take in.
And then we ignore
incredible frequency sources,
such as sound in our own voice.
Can you talk about that
really more on a nutrient
level for not just
the soul but the body?
>>PURCE: Well the world that
we live in is a vibratory one,
so everything is regularity
and periodicities of movement.
And the way that we can
participate in that-- so going
back to my 3 Ps, my
praise, petition, and then
participation, the
way we can participate
in the vibratory nature of
things is by bracing ourselves.
And the way that we
have of doing that
is through our voices.
And I often sort
of tease people.
I was once on a plane
with a whole orchestra
again between
Boston and New York.
And when we came to
the baggage pick up,
there was a woman laboring
under her double bass.
So I couldn't help whispering
in her ear, you should sing.
Because you don't need an
extra seat on the plane.
We carry our voices around
all the time, and our voices--
the way that we
integrate with the world
is the way that we
flow with the world.
It's the way that we become
present with the world,
and it's interesting to look
at why we stopped chanting.
And this is one of the
things that's always--
>>REGINA: That's
my next question.
Why did we stop?
Well, I have one
more before that.
So when you're in
the moment, when
you're putting these
sounds out, does this
remove us from, or
bypass, egoic function?
Because so much of
our self-perception
is just tied up in the egoic
perception of what we are.
And I mean kind of the
bastardized use of the word
ego, not the pure word.
>>PURCE: Well, you
know, we have--
so if I see you as
separate from me,
then that leads me
to two next impulses.
One is, I like you,
and I want you.
And I cannot have enough of you.
So I'm in a state of
desire and of attachment.
Or if I see you
separate from me,
and I find I'm lumbered with
you, but I don't want you,
then that leads to
anger, resentment,
and pushing you away.
So in Tibetan Buddhism,
these desire and attachment,
or anger, and resentment, and
aversion to primary impulses,
which are all
based on ignorance.
And ignorance is
ignoring what is,
which is there is no separation,
but we ignore it even though we
know-- so there's an
element of blame--
that there is no separation.
And these are a fundamental
basis on which we exist.
These are known in Tibetan
Buddhism as the three poisons
and are the cause of all
sickness, of all separation,
of all our problems, of our
delusions of separation.
And so sound that allows us
to overcome the separation
so that there is no--
we're able to integrate
in such a way that,
for the duration of the
sound, and while we're
listening to it,
there is no separation
because sound is
very interesting.
Sound creates form.
So every form has its
own sounds, you know.
We know this from winding our
finger around a wine glass,
and then the wine
glass sings it's note.
>>REGINA: Yes.
In somatics, where
you can watch sound
create vibrational patterns in
the sand, geometric patterns.
>>PURCE: Well, this
was what started me off
in my work with sand,
but I come back to that.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>PURCE: So with the wine
glass, if you wet a finger
and wind it around, the
wine glass sings its note.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: And that's
the note you can then
direct back at the wine
glass in order to shatter it.
So the sound of a thing is the
key to its own dissolution.
>>REGINA: Wait a minute.
So you're saying if we're
ringing our wine glass,
OK, if it's ringing,
if we tone that
back to it, that
same tone, is that
what causes the shattering?
>>PURCE: So that could--
well, that, but you
slightly, come slightly above
and slightly below
because the intervals
slightly above
and slightly below
are the most disharmonious.
And so you do what has
been called worrying it.
So in the early '70s, I
was living and working
with a German composer,
Karlheinz Stockhausen,
and one of the pieces
that we worked on
was called Alphabet
for Liege, which
had been commissioned by the
city of Liege in Belgium.
And so what we did was we had 13
different installations showing
the effect of sound on matter.
And one of these, an old
assistants of Stockhausen,
Hugh Davis, got these
very large sheets of glass
with holes in them.
And then he had what he
called a siren, which
is an electronic instrument
for electronically changing
the pitch continuously.
[MIMICKING SIREN] And
then, so he'd get this,
and it had this little
of bolt on the end.
And then he'd take
these big sheets.
Meanwhile, the audience
was perambulatory.
It was in an old, in a half
built television studio.
So the audience was going from
installation to installation.
So people would
come, and then he'd
take these very large
sheets of glass,
and he'd bolt them
on to the siren.
And then he'd turn up the sound.
[MIMICKING SIREN] And then,
he poured water on the glass.
And then, as soon as
he got to the harmonics
of the pitch of
the glass itself,
the vibrations, such as
you were talking about,
the cymatics, the pattern, these
vibratory patterns, would show.
And then he'd know what
the pitch of the glass was.
And then, he'd get to
the pitch of the glass,
and he'd do what he
called worrying it,
where you're just slightly
above and below the pitch
of the glass.
[HUMMING PITCH]
Meanwhile, the
audience was calm.
It was holding the breath.
And suddenly, it would shatter.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>PURCE: But the only problem
with wine glasses is you
have to have very good
quality wine glasses,
crystal wine glasses.
A very accurate voice, and
most people have neither.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
And so I assume
your wine glass is
going to sing both major
and minor tones only
on the amount of water?
Let's talk about it.
I love ringing wine glasses.
>>PURCE: You can
make them depending
on the amount of water
or the kind wine glass,
you can have any tone.
It's just a way of showing that
every form has its own sound.
So the gift of sound is that
every form has its own sound,
but it also dissolves sound.
So one of the gifts of sound is
that it dissolves boundaries.
It dissolves limitations.
So it dissolves the
boundaries between you and me.
It dissolves the boundaries
between matter and spirit.
between this and between that.
And so it allows for
community in a way which--
community is one of the things
that is not happening anymore.
And so the way that communities
were created and sustained
in the past was
through chanting.
So if you make sounds together,
you dissolve the boundaries
between each one of
you, each one of us.
If you're chanting together,
you dissolve the boundaries
between nature, between
the outside world
and the inside world so that you
are able to overcome separation
in every way.
>>REGINA: This practice,
it's not an agenda
that it was destroyed.
We kind of lost our way
in terms of community
on a number of levels.
Certainly, with the
advent of moving away
from villages and such into
suburbs, for example, where
families became more separate
from one another and fractured,
this was just a
practical extension of it
that we lost our
little communities,
whether we sang together, and
wherever we sang together,
whether it was in church
or within a social group
of some kind.
How do you look at how we
lost our way in singing?
That's why I said, we're now the
caged birds, and we don't sing.
>>PURCE: Well, there are
many reasons for that.
One reason interestingly
is the development
of musical notation, which began
in around the eighth century.
So once you can
notate music, then you
can use all the
parameters of sound
and permutate them in
really complex ways.
And then you can repeat
the music that was created.
So interestingly, this
is called to execute.
>>REGINA: Oh interesting.
>>PURCE: Professional musicians
are called executing--
>>REGINA: The notes.
>>PURCE: Exactly.
Executing the very thing that
they are trying to recreate.
So musical notation meant that
it was only available to those
who could read music,
and this has always
been a fairly sort of
limited group of people--
professionals.
And the interesting
thing about professionals
is the opposite of
professionals is
to be an amateur,
which means literally
in Latin to love something.
Amour means to love.
So by definition,
amateurs love something.
And the inference, of
course, is that professionals
don't love something,
and that's, sometimes,
in the music the case.
So one of the ways that we
stopped using our voices
was through this
hijacking of sacred music
by the professionals.
And then the loss of
communities and the loss
of spiritual traditions.
So in the Christian
tradition, for example, people
would come together
at the same time
of the year, the
same time of the day,
using traditionally Latin,
to have the same language.
And all over the Christian
world, or Christendom, people
would be chanting the same
time, the same kind of thing,
which was a huge kind of
resonance that was happening,
and the same, of
course, is in Islam,
and the same is in most
spiritual traditions.
You have these
communities of chant
that harness the same times of
the year, the same festivals,
the same holy days, the
same times of the day.
In the Christian
tradition, the five hours
that the monks would, or
the nuns, would chant.
You know, the turning points,
which through chanting
enables you to go through
the slightly dodgy moments.
So chant was used to sustain
us through dangerous times.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
so it would also
keep you in tune
with one another
as you were saying earlier,
a type of resonance,
a kind of psycho-spiritual
resonance within a community,
a tribe, a township,
a church, or whatnot.
There was a baseline
understanding of what life was,
I would assume.
>>PURCE: Absolutely,
and chanting together
was a way of homogenizing
the community,
or creating good feeling,
or dissolving disharmony
in the community, and
it's one of the quickest
ways of creating a harmonious
group, which can work together.
So I like to think of the
people who work with me,
we're part of this
sonorous community,
and I see that, in general, in
the world, we're disenchanted.
People are complaining.
They're disenchanted.
And so my sense of
the remedy of that
is to enchant, and to enchant
means to make magical again
through chanting.
I see it literally.
>>REGINA: No, that
makes total sense.
And in fact, I think you don't--
well, especially on public
transit here in London,
I can't even imagine
someone singing.
I can't imagine
anyone even humming.
People don't look at each other.
They don't smile.
They don't connect.
And it almost as though--
not just here, and
this is in the US too--
the Tube in particular people
really need their privacy,
I guess.
But there's this notion
we've almost become
too sophisticated to be seen
doing something as lowly
or out of control as singing.
>>PURCE: Well, I
mean in the Tube
what we see is everybody
with earphones.
And earphones are
interesting because we
have an atavistic memory
that we're supposed
to have sound inside us.
So now, because we feel so
disempowered, what we do
is we empower the professionals
to make the sound,
and then we try and ram it back
inside us through earphones.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: Thinking
that by putting it out
from outside in by
professionals, then
we will have sound inside us.
But actually, this is
the cause of deafness.
You know, earphones
make us deaf.
So what we have to
remember is that we
need to regenerate
the sound ourselves.
It's only when we
become the instrument.
So we are instruments, and so
the way that we remain healthy
is by activating these
resonances within us.
Otherwise, we're like an
instrument on a shelf that
becomes tarnished, out of tune.
And so by activating these
rhythms and these resonances
within us, we can
resonate and re-harmonize
all the different
aspects of ourselves
so that we're
harmonious instruments.
>>REGINA: You know,
that makes total sense.
And you were talking about the
homogeneous nature when we're
talking about more the
psycho-spiritual field
of a group of people who
chant or sing together.
That itself is even
seen as a negative now,
the notion of
homogeneous culture.
It's about diversity.
I mean, politically,
it's about diversity.
And so what's your
response to that?
>>PURCE: Yes, well
it's both, isn't it?
It's glocalization, I
think it's now called.
>>REGINA: Glocalization.
I haven't heard that one.
>>PURCE: Yeah, I think
that's what it's called.
So one of the
interesting things--
when I started this, I
realized that we, as a society,
we've gone silent.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: And that all
the traditional ways
that we had of making
sounds together
had gone, been eroded
from our society,
through measuring, and
counting, and trying to predict,
and remain living through
counting, and measuring.
And so my agenda was, as
I said, to re-enchant.
And so when I was trying
to think about this,
or at least when I look back
on what I was trying to do--
because when I was doing it I
really wasn't sure what I was
doing--
I realized I was asking
the question, if we're
going to sing again, what
song are we going to sing?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PURCE: Now, if
we sing in words--
if we're singing a national
anthem one side of the border,
you know like in
Europe, for example,
then we're saying
the right song.
If we stepped over the
boarder, it's the wrong song.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>PURCE: So as soon as
you incorporate words,
then you have this problem
of being OK, appropriate,
or not appropriate.
And also, words
are then that which
keep you in time because words
and language is time bound.
And so when I was looking
for ways of chanting,
I was looking for something that
goes beyond the use of words.
So I worked a lot
with monks and nuns,
for example, who have
this tradition of chanting
five times a day, or did.
It's now being eroded by things
that they need to do and so on.
But so what I realized was
there was this movement
in the '50s of
re-vernacularizing
or vernacularizing the chants
that were traditionally--
people have always chanted
in archaic languages.
So they have the
intention to chant,
but not being bound
by the meanings.
As soon as you've translated
it into local languages,
then you're caught
by the meaning,
so you have to think
about what you're doing.
And then, for example,
if I sing hymns,
I find that I've sung
verses one to four,
and I have no idea
what I'm singing about
because I don't
listen to the words.
And so I spend the
whole of verse five
rereading verses one
to four, and then I
don't know what
verse 5 is about.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: So the
problem is language.
So the idea is to go beyond
language, to use language
to go beyond language.
And so one of the things that
I discovered when I first
started this many,
many years ago
was a form of chanting
from Central Asia.
And this kind of chanting
chants on a single note and then
goes into that note to
amplify the sounds that
are contained within that note,
which are called harmonics
or overtones, which you
can then hear floating
above the fundamental note
as high flute-like sounds.
Now, this is very interesting
because in Western music
in the 17th century, with
the popularity of keyboard
instruments, we retuned our
instruments because the pianos
or keyboards were in tune in
one part but very out of tune
in another.
And so it was a real
problem of tuning,
so this was a problem
which concerned
mathematicians, musicians,
polymaths of all kinds.
And so what was adopted--
many, many versions
were proposed--
and what we adopted
in was what's
called the tempered scale,
the well-tempered scale.
So Bach, for
example, uses a form
of this, which he
then demonstrates
for the preludes and fugues
for the Well-Tempered Clavier.
So he shows how you can now
play in every key, which
was not possible before.
So all music since Bach
has been out of tune,
and at the same time, would
never have been possible
without this retuning.
So I like to think of this
as the Faustian bargain.
We'll make all our
music out of tune,
and then look what
we can do with it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Well, that brings us to
some interesting discussion.
So if modern music
is out of tune,
and we're all subjecting
ourselves to it all the time,
first of all, what is that doing
to us on a personal integration
or disintegration level?
>>PURCE: Well,
firstly, when this
was done in the 17th century, it
was thought-- so what happened
was a traditional tuning would
go from a note to the note
five notes above,
and then from that
note, five notes about
that, and then five.
It's called the cycle of fifths.
[HUMMING] And then so on.
And then you should, in
theory, come to the octave
above where you started.
But in fact, what
happens is you don't.
Overlap it by a
quarter of a semitone
known as the Pythagorean comma.
So the problem of tuning was
what to do with this overlap.
So what was done in
the 17th century,
how they solved this problem,
this Faustian bargain as I like
to think of it, was
they took this interval,
and they put it back
inside the octave,
making all the intervals
in the octave slightly
bigger or slightly
smaller, hence out of tune.
So all music since then,
since it's the 17th century,
has been a little
bit out of tune.
And since we export our
music all over the world,
it means pretty much
everywhere now is out of tune.
And so what it does is it--
well, firstly, it was thought
that it wouldn't matter,
that nobody would notice.
And most people don't
because it's very little.
And in fact, our piano
tuner comes to our house,
and we have this little joke.
And I say, hey Bruce, you
know, are the octaves in tune?
And he says stretched.
And so I say, Bruce,
are the octaves in tune?
And he says stretched.
And so now when he goes
to tune people's pianos,
his joke is that he's going
to stretch their octave.
So, naturally, we're
a resonant system.
And so if we're all listening
to music that's out of tune,
even though we don't
know it's out of tune,
we are, of course, out
of tune, and I say it
as a pathology of our times.
The music that we're listening
to, the music that we're making
is out of tune.
And so the reason that I adopted
this form of chanting as a way
in for people, where we
chant on a single note
and then amplify the harmonics
because the harmonics
come about through
resonance, which
means literally to resound.
And the sounds that come
about through resonance
can only be in tune.
And so how I came
to be doing this--
there are two aspects
of how I received this.
One was through, starting
with Tibetan Lamas
from the '60s
onwards, where they
have certain tantric colleges
within Tibetan Buddhism have
this form of chanting.
And so I studied with
the Gyuto chant master
who teaches this to his monks.
And then, in the
early '70s, I worked
with Karlheinz Stockhausen,
the German composer,
who in 1968 had
written a piece called
Stimmung for Six Singers who
chants on a B-flat on one note,
and then through
a very simple form
of exaggerating the
vowels, they produce
the harmonics which
can be just heard
over the fundamental note.
So this was a way of chanting,
which when I started,
had not been heard really
except by a few arcane musicians
interested in Stockhausen or
Tibetan or Mongolian chant.
And so I find it an
extraordinary way in,
both for musicians
who'd never heard it
and for people who had been told
to stand at the back and mouth
it, who people considered
that the sounds came out
of their mouth was unacceptable
because it was out of tune.
>>REGINA: Right.
Right, that's interesting
because our ear
has become accustomed
to the music
that we've been hearing in our
lifetime, which is out of tune.
So now when we hear the pure
tones, that can sound dissonant
to us to the ear, can't it?
>>PURCE: Well, I think we very
rarely hear the pure tones,
and with the overtones, when we
hear them, it's like a memory.
It's like recognition,
which means to re-cognize,
to again know, and we can
only again know something
that we knew before.
And how we knew these before
is because we're hearing
our own geometry made audible.
So we're hearing ourselves.
And there's a real--
it's like coming home.
So when we hear
the harmonics, it's
like a reclamation of our
understanding of all that is.
>>REGINA: Really on
a subconscious level.
>>PURCE: On all levels.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
OK, so if we're talking
about Western music,
if we're talking about the
influence of let's just say
American and British
music alone that
has been exported all around
the world, as much as we
prize diversity,
culturally, sexually,
in every other way that is
now the basis of society is
to promote diversity, where we
have a pretty homogeneous kind
of output in terms of music
and what is being given
to the world, which is really--
what does that do
to societies when
they're all listening
to the same tune,
and that's not of their culture,
it's not of their genetics?
You understand what I'm saying?
>>PURCE: Yes, well I think
the whole musical exportation
and culture is a
real problem and is
a sign of the dysfunctionality
of our society.
And it's a cause
of real separation,
and so what I'm trying
to do with sound
is to allow us to overcome
the separation, to become one,
to become present, to be
in the flow, to be healed,
to re-resonate all
of the harmonics
and the resonation and
the patterns within us
and to become whole.
I see that.
And to reclaim the sonorous
community that we once had.
And so I do all kinds of
things with sound, you know.
I'm trying to re-educate us
so that we have these tools.
And then I use it
in other ways, and I
work with Family Patterns
and Family Constellations
and interruption--
>>REGINA: And let's
about that in a moment.
>>PURCE: Absolutely.
And so I use it that way.
And then I do
extended ceremonies,
which last a week,
things that haven't
happened in our society
for a generation.
Or using sound trying
to not just teach
ways of viewing
sound, but actually
to put it into practice.
>>REGINA: Don't you have a
workshop coming up actually?
>>PURCE: I do this weekend.
>>REGINA: I thought so.
There's one coming up very soon.
And what kind of-- before
we go into that, let's
just talk about the effects.
What kind of effects does being
together, chanting together
for a week, seem to
have on the people
when they're coming
out the other end?
>>PURCE: It's
completely blissful.
I think people--
they fall in love
with each other as a community,
so they rediscover the sort
of joy of being together.
And they rediscover what
happens when they're completely
in the now, in the present.
So it's an utterly joyful
ecstatic experience,
which changes people's
lives instantly.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I can feel
that just talking with you
that that would be the case.
That sounds wonderful.
I mean, I think that's
also why a lot of people
head to foreign countries,
why Americans and Brits head
to India, so you have a chance
to chant in Sanskrit together
because we've left
behind the traditions
of our own countries.
And as you say, I think this
also has a double effect of--
we're chanting in
a language we have
no understanding of whatsoever.
So it's just really tones.
It's just vowels and
consonants, right?
And so, on that note of
vowels and consonants,
you talk about the
extension of one
and the clipped cutting
off from the other.
So let's talk about
the mechanics of vowels
and consonants a moment.
>>PURCE: Well, just in
terms of archaic languages
before we do that, when I
work with monks and nuns,
very often, they asked me
to do the overtone chanting
because the tradition that
they had of chanting five times
a day was one of induction
of contemplation.
And it no longer does
that because they
have to chant a
liturgy so many times.
And again, this problem of
being immersed in the meaning
rather than using the sound
to go beyond sound, to
go into the nature
of mind itself.
>>REGINA: Right
>>PURCE: And so they
very often ask me
to do this kind of chanting
because for them, it's
a relief.
And in fact, the abbess
of one such community
said that it was the
one thing that she
used to take her novitiate
and teach them this,
and she said it's the
one thing that enabled
her to remain as abbess.
She was constantly being
re-voted in as abbess,
and she said that
this form of chanting
had so changed her
life and given her
such a tool that it enabled
her to go on doing this.
So to get back to vowels
and consonants, when
we make vocal
sounds, we divide it
very crudely into these two
different ways of making up
sounds.
So first of all, we generate
the breath, which comes up.
And if we don't interrupt
the way that it comes out,
then we call this vowel.
If we interrupt it
with teeth, and tongue,
and all the various mechanisms
that we have for doing that,
then we are creating
noise sound.
So if the waveform is ordered,
then we call it tone or sound.
And if we interrupt it, and
if the waveforms are chaotic,
then we call that noise.
And then a complete
noise is what
we call white noise,
where the wave
forms are completely chaotic.
And so with consonance,
there's this interspersion
of chaotic acoustic waves
into the otherwise flow
of pure vowels, which
are pure tones, which
are what we call harmonics.
And so when we speak,
it's a more or less equal.
You know, so this
is a vowel sound,
which is the air coming up
uninterrupted, but just shaped
by the shape of the vocal
cavity, which determines which
vowels we're going to make.
And then, when we are speaking
with more or less equal,
we interrupt that in order
to punctuate it, in order
to make sense of what's gone
before with consonant sounds,
excuse me.
And so what's interesting
about-- as soon
as you change from
speaking into chanting,
then the one thing
that you do is
you are extending the vowel
because the only thing you
can extend when you're
chanting, intoning, or singing
is the vowel sound.
You don't extend the
noise of the sounds.
You don't--
>>REGINA: The punctuations.
Yes.
>>PURCE: So what you
extend is the vowel.
So the vowel is what
creates the harmonic.
So the harmonic is a supremely
ordered aspect of the sound.
If a consonant is
the noise component,
and the vowel is the
harmonic component,
almost like a sine wave.
So when you extend the sound,
what you're extending is order.
You are extending the harmonic.
And so in all traditions, the
development of consciousness
has been likened to, through
language, the induction
of order.
So in the Tibetan
tradition, diamond mind.
So a diamond is carbon atoms
in their most ordered state.
So on the one hand,
you have a lead pencil,
and then the other hand
you have a diamond,
which is supremely ordered,
can cut anything else,
and is utterly transparent.
So the idea of the
development of consciousness
is elided with this
induction of order.
So with sound,
that which carries
the order of the harmonics,
which mean the vowels.
>>REGINA: The vowels.
What happens when you dominantly
speak a language that's
virtually all consonants?
I mean, I think of
Welsh, even Hungarian
to a large extent,
certain languages that
seem to have a lot of
consonants, just almost
no vowels.
What happens to the
psyche, the emotions,
the spirit of a
culture that is lacking
vowels for the most part?
>>PURCE: Well, I think
language is very interesting,
and I think the kind of language
we speak affects our psyche.
And what kind of
language you speak
is related to the landscape
we are bought up into as well.
But technically, it's not
possible to have no vowels
because the sound that
comes up and out is vowels.
It's only when we interrupt--
>>REGINA: But you
know what I mean.
>>PURCE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: In Welsh,
I mean, it appears
to be virtually all consonants.
>>PURCE: Well, certainly
when it's written it is.
I don't know about the
sounds of Welsh though.
I think when it's spoken--
>>REGINA: You still get the
vowels and the breath running
through it, of course.
>>PURCE: And sacred
languages have no vowels.
So for example, Arabic,
or Hebrew, or Egyptian.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>PURCE: Never
notated the vowels.
And so even if you see
the word in Hebrew of God,
it would be G dot dot
dot D, for example.
Or [SPEAKING HEBREW] So
Yahweh is all vowels sounds.
So very often in
archaic traditions,
the divine, the name of the
divine is only vowel sounds.
But in notation,
the vowel sounds
are indicated, inferred--
>>REGINA: I see.
>>PURCE: Above and
below, but they're
not actually written because
to write a vowel sound
would be to try and limit that
which is without limits, which
is the divine.
And so very often, these vowels
are suggested and inferred.
One of the reasons we didn't
know how to pronounce Egyptian
was because we didn't
have the vowels notated.
>>REGINA: Right.
Right.
Well, I just find it interesting
because some languages
to the ear appear to be much
more clipped and ordered
toward consonants,
much more punctuated,
and others seem more extended
and seem to flow more,
the Latin languages,
for example,
seem to feel like they
have more breath, like they
have more vowels to it.
And we all like
listening to them.
>>PURCE: Yes, well,
I mean, this would
be a very
unfashionable research,
the one that should be done.
>>REGINA: I think
it would be too.
>>PURCE: I mean, I think,
we look like we speak.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: So certain
languages mean
that we change the shape of
our mouth in certain ways,
and that affects just like you
look like your cat, you know,
because you are looking at
your cat the whole time.
So you look like the
language you're speaking.
But this is, course,
politically dodgy.
>>REGINA: Yes it is
politically dodgy,
but that's OK on this show.
Our viewers are open minded,
thus the name Open Minds
for the show.
>>PURCE: So now I'm
very interested in how
we look like we speak and what
effect it has in our psyche
and on different cultures.
And I think that a lot more
research could be done on this.
>>REGINA: I think so too
because you see often
people who have more of a
nervous quality to them,
for example, you don't
hear a lot of vowels.
Everything seems to be locked
up in the throat, held back,
very edgy, more
consonant driven.
And I mean, I think there
it's the chicken or egg which
is affecting the other.
>>PURCE: Absolutely, yes.
Are we happy because we sing, or
do we sing because we're happy?
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
So before we get into
a little bit of toning,
which you're going
to do for us--
and that will be interesting
for us to hear a pure tone if we
are not accustomed to it--
let's talk a little bit
about some of the effects.
And I love that you worked with
your family their entire lives.
You've worked with your sons.
You've helped them
pass examinations
and such through tone.
How does that work?
>>PURCE: Ooh.
Working with my family.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: Well, I work
with families in general.
>>REGINA: Yes, in
Family Constellations.
We have time to go
to that as well.
>>PURCE: Shall we do that?
>>REGINA: Yeah, go for it.
>>PURCE: So one of the
other aspects of my work
is working with
inherited traumas.
And so this is a very
interesting subject now
and is being
corroborated by science.
So I did a research
fellowship the early '70s
with Maurice Wilkins who got the
Nobel Prize for DNA with Watson
and Crick.
And at that point, everything
was considered genetic.
So--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PURCE: You couldn't talk
about Lysenko or anybody
who-- even Darwin
felt that you could
inherit acquired characters,
and Lamarck, and so on.
So now it's all
very fashionable.
The most fashionable
area of science
is epigenetics, which means
the inheritance of that
which is not through the DNA.
And so the work with families,
which I also do with sound,
is about interruption.
So if going back
two generations,
you have any kind
of an interruption
to what might be considered
a flowering of a life-- so
early death, suicide,
mental illness, emigration,
incarceration, dodgy dealing,
injustices, abortions,
giving children up for
adoption, or being given up
for adoption, anything
which interrupts
the normal notion of
what a life might be
causes a stable pattern
of trauma in the field.
And this, then, goes down
through the generations,
and it seems to attract
somebody in every generation who
seems to relate, usually
without even knowing,
to what happened to
the earlier person.
So they find themselves
being excluded, or pushed
outside the system or
the family in some way,
or even following exactly
what the earlier person had
done or has happened to them.
>>REGINA: It's in the field.
>>PURCE: It's in the field.
It's in the family
and ancestral field.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: And so what's really
interesting that these people
to whom who are
vulnerable to this are--
in a way, it's the
curse and the blessing.
So they are the ones that find
themselves outside the system.
But at the same time, they are
the only ones that can heal it.
And so this is the blessing.
And so what the work
involves is having
people choose people to
represent their family members
and to then place them in
some kind of a tableau, which
represents the
dynamics between them.
And then, the work
begins to unfold.
And in this way,
you see the families
through the eyes of different
members and through time.
So normally, we see our family
through a very narrow window
of were we loved, were we
not loved, were we loved more
or less than our siblings, or
were we good enough, or were we
not, and that's it.
So this way we see the
family through the eyes
of all members.
We see the family through
time, and we see it
through what happened and
through interruptions,
which are normally something
we don't really know about.
And this changes everything.
And so what I have found is
that it's really important
to acknowledge previous
members of the family, which
we call ancestors.
So in other cultures, ancestors
are completely central.
So in traditional culture,
especially in the Far East,
it's the only way that the
ongoing harmonious development
of the family can happen is by
acknowledging the ancestors.
So in every family when I was
in Japan in the early '80s,
every family had
an ancestral altar
which was acknowledged
every day--
fresh rice, fresh alcohol.
Offerings would be
made to the previous--
well, it was patriarchal--
so the head of the family.
Nowadays when I ask
Japanese people,
they say, oh, my
grandmother still has one.
So it's dying.
But what I found
is that ancestors
have a job description,
which is to help
the living remain alive.
But they have no agency unless
the living acknowledge them.
And until that happens,
it's like they're
clamorous children trying to
get our attention by putting out
a foot to trip us up, as
if to say, please open
these channels of transmission,
so we can keep you alive.
And then as soon as you
acknowledge the ancestors,
as soon as you honor
the ancestors, then
they're on board.
Then, they can help us, and they
stop being irritating clamorous
children.
They stop trying to trip us up.
And then things
that we aspired to,
things that we have
not even realized
we wanted to do start flowing.
Things that we would
like to happen,
even if we didn't know
we wanted them to happen,
start happening.
>>REGINA: Is it almost
as though you're
going back and
re-patterning past?
If time and space
are non-linear,
that through this work,
through toning and such,
you're reconnecting
with and re-patterning
what happened to make an easier
flow of that ancestral energy
through you now.
>>PURCE: Absolutely.
We're working in the present to
change the past and the future
so that these things don't
go down through our families.
So often, people come
and say, well, I'm
really aware of this
and that and the other,
and I don't want to pass
it on to my children.
But of course we do.
We pass all these
dysfunctional patterns
we pass on to our
children simply because we
have no other way of
being other than the way
that we have received
and resonated
with our previous
parents and grandparents.
So we then turn and
face our children
and then pattern
them in the same way.
So this is the only
way we can interrupt
these dysfunctional patterns,
these negative patterns,
that we've received in order
that we don't pass them on.
And we have a responsibility
to get you to do that.
It's our job.
>>REGINA: Yes it is,
very interesting.
On a life giving notion, there
are a couple of other areas
I found fascinating, and
that was toning and using
sound for the
development of seed stock
for example, little seedlings.
>>PURCE: Yeah.
Well, there have
been many people
over the years who have
used sound to chant
to plants in order to encourage
growth of different kinds.
People in India, and
this is certainly
something that's
happened all over.
And playing music to
plants, of course,
they find that they like
Mozart, and they like this,
and they don't like this.
>>REGINA: Baxter's
work is beautiful.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>PURCE: One of the earlier--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: --people who did this.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And then let's go back to your
sons, and singing, and tone,
and helping them pass exams.
I think people find this
very practical and useful
if we can find a pure
note within ourselves.
>>PURCE: Well, there
are lots of reasons why
the boys passed exams, really.
>>REGINA: Well, they're smart.
>>PURCE: That's true, yes.
And of course, Merlin, our
eldest son, discovered,
took my husband's
theory and the idea
that the more something
has been done,
the easier it becomes to do.
So he and his
colleagues got together
in A levels, which is our
senior exam, at school
and decided to answer
the later questions first
because more people will
have done those questions.
And then they'd come back
to the first question
because more people will
have done those, rather,
so that the more people have
done the first questions will
mean it's easier for
them to get them right.
And they'll do terribly well.
>>REGINA: Brilliant.
Oh I absolutely love it.
Do your children chant as well?
>>PURCE: They do.
>>REGINA: I know you and Rupert
both do, but do your children?
>>PURCE: They do, and
our son Cosmo is now--
Cosmo Sheldrick-- is a
very well-known musician
and uses his voice,
and absolutely.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: I love it.
I'm going to ask you
a little bit more
about some family stuff
going on at the very end.
We have a little
bit of time left,
and I wanted to talk to you
about the notion of using--
we talked about trauma
a couple of times--
but the notion of using
chanting through the process
of transition or death and
what this does, how this
is utilized, what it
does to the being who
is leaving this reality.
>>PURCE: There are so many
stories about sound in relation
to the passage, to death,
and choirs of angels.
I mean the interesting
thing about angels
is they don't come
in herds or packs.
They come in choirs.
So by very definition, their
whole nature is sonorous.
And the fact, I see them as
personified representations
of vibratory levels of
existence that exist
between the divine and us.
And in the Neoplatonic
tradition, a little bit of God
separates out, a little
bit of the soul substance
separates out from God and comes
down through the great chain
of being, finally through
the angels, the cherubim
and seraphim, and then comes
down to us through the elements
into a human being.
And then at the moment of
death, that separates out
and goes back through
the music of the spheres,
and we drop off all our
psychological blockages,
and configurations, and
return to the divine.
And Plato describes how
sitting on each of the spheres
is a musical being, a
bird-like creature, a siren,
uttering a different note.
So this passage between--
and they're called the
soul guides, psychopomps.
So in many traditions, this
journey between the worlds
has been described as
a sonorous one, both
coming in and going out.
And so in one of the things
I do are extended ceremonies.
I realize that it's important
not just to teach methods
of chanting in order to have
them as tools to overcome
separation, to get into
deep states of meditation,
and so on.
But actually to
provide situations
where people can,
for extended periods,
realize what happens
when you really do this.
And when you were
ceremonially, the key there
is that you have a witness.
So when you want to
change ourselves--
so people come to my workshops
because they think they could
be better, or kinder,
or more compassionate,
or develop their consciousness.
But then, they go home
and then the default
them sets in because
that's the them they always
know up to then.
So how do you sustain
the changes that happen?
And so what I found is that in
order to sustain the changes,
you need a witness.
And that's why if you
get married, for example,
traditionally, you have somebody
who signs a document and says,
I was here.
I saw, and I signed
this to say I was here,
which means that you
are now recognized
as being no longer unmarried.
You are now married.
And then you invite all your
friends and your families
to witness all those.
So nowadays, people have
destination weddings.
They go to exotic places
and get married underwater,
come back, and
tell their friends
and say, oh, by the
way we're married.
And they say, oh really?
>>REGINA: It was
already on Facebook.
So it's OK.
They're aware.
>>PURCE: Absolutely.
But the point about
the ceremonies
is that you have people
there as witnesses
so that there's no going back.
So you know that
they know that you
know that they know that
they're now no longer unmarried.
They're married.
And so they sustains them
in the new state of being,
and this is really key.
So in terms of working, I
find that working ceremonially
is essential for
this because then you
have all the people
witnessing your change.
And so I do these very
extended ceremonies.
And two of the ones that I do
working with Tibetan practice
of conscious dying.
So this October,
I have one where
I will be working with a
particular practice called
the poa where you shoot
your consciousness out
of your head at
the moment of death
and direct it so you don't
find yourself in some--
>>REGINA: Lost in
some Bardo way.
>>PURCE: Exactly.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>PURCE: This is very
important part of my work.
>>REGINA: So give
us a sample of what
toning is like and
overtoning, and you're just
recovering from a cold.
So if you're a little squeaky,
then we'll just forgive you,
or we'll stop it, OK?
>>PURCE: OK.
So I'm just going to
make a sound on one note,
and then I'll maybe
indicate with my hands
other sounds that
should be audible.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PURCE: [TONING]
>>REGINA: You can
hear all of them.
>>PURCE: Good.
>>REGINA: Yes, you
can hear all of them.
But it's all within
the same note.
>>PURCE: So I was
just making one note.
And the rest were
harmonics, which
come about through changing the
shape of the resonant cavity.
>>REGINA: Yes, at the mouth.
Right.
OK.
So let's talk about
for our viewers
now, who are by
this time absolutely
fascinated and absolutely know
they have to start singing
at least in the shower
if nowhere else,
how you find A, your pure tone,
and a couple of techniques
that, for meditation,
for example, that really
take you deep,
that you find work
with your groups of people.
Maybe it's a little mantra, a
little chant, a certain tone.
Maybe share a couple
of those with us
so we have some takeaways.
>>PURCE: So I think on
a very simple level,
the simplest level of all
is humming and listening
to yourself humming.
So just making a continuous
sound on one note,
and all the time that
you're making that sound,
allowing it to be
integrated with the vessel
of your hearing.
So there is no moment
when you're not
hearing through this intracative
listening, not judging good,
bad sound, not right
sound, but just listening
and through your hearing
attention integrating
with the continuity of the
sound-stream within the sound.
So letting it be continuous
and continuously listening.
And when you realize
you've forgotten
to listen, come back and
maintain that listening.
And that in itself is a
really profound practice
as long as you can go on.
>>REGINA: Doesn't
matter which note?
>>PURCE: Doesn't
matter which you note.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>PURCE: Although, if you do
too high, you'll get exhausted.
If you do it too
low, you'll waver.
>>REGINA: So find your
comfortable middle zone.
>>PURCE: Find a comfortable--
>>REGINA: Doesn't matter if
it's major, minor, nothing else
matters.
In tune or out of tune,
it doesn't matter.
>>PURCE: No because
sound is relative.
So if you've got one note,
it's never out of tune.
>>REGINA: Right,
right, there you go.
OK.
And then something that takes--
unless the answer is the same--
something that takes you
really deep in preparation
for a deep meditation.
>>PURCE: Well, I
think this is it.
So whenever you're going
to do a deep meditation,
you start with the most
energetic form of practice
first, so the more
vigorous and then you
get less and less until
you're contemplative.
So I would say that this kind
of challenge is very good.
And then you can also begin
to articulate the vowels.
So if you want to bring in
the elements of the harmonics,
so you could make a
sort of cave-like mouth,
for example, containing
mouth, not completely closed,
big inside, round,
stretched, but round,
and open at the front.
And then begin to
articulate the vowels.
So move from one vowel
to another seamlessly
and really extending the
transitions between the vowels.
You can give yourself
Mickey Mouse ears,
so you can hear more
what's happening inside.
But extending the
transitions because it's
in the transitions that
we hear the harmonics,
that we hear the changes.
And again, always listening.
Always listening to the
sounds that you're making.
>>REGINA: Yes, beautiful.
Thank you for those
very practical words.
And then before
we sign off here,
I just wanted to say
you have an incredibly
productive little family.
As you already mentioned,
Cosmo is really
making it on the music
scene doing amazing music.
And your other son Merlin
is following in his
dad's footsteps, and he's
actually going into it--
and you say in a very
irreverent, but amazing way--
into the study of the world of
fungus, the interconnectedness
and intelligence.
And that book's due out before?
Well, maybe within the year?
>>PURCE: Well, maybe.
I think probably not.
I think--
>>REGINA: It's still
a little longer.
>>PURCE: Yes.
>>PURCE: But we'll look out for
Merlin Sheldrake and his work.
>>PURCE: Yes.
>>REGINA: In the
world of fungi, which
I'm absolutely fascinated with.
And of course, the parents.
So congratulations
to you for having
a wonderful couple of boys or
young men now and for the work
you're doing.
And I really
appreciate your having
taken the time to come over
here and join us today.
>>PURCE: You're very welcome.
>>REGINA: To learn more
about Jill's workshops,
you can visit her website
at healingvoice.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
in London for "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]